Add Apache Flink release 1.14.0 (#466)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2021-09-21-release-1.14.0.md

---
layout: post 
title:  "Apache Flink 1.14.0 Release Announcement"
date: 2021-09-21T08:00:00.000Z 
categories: news 
authors:
- joemoe:
  name: "Johannes Moser"

excerpt: The Apache Flink community is excited to announce the release of Flink 1.14.0! Around xxx contributors worked on over xxxx issues to TODO.
---

> Just a couple of days ago the Apache Software Foundation announced it’s annual report and Apache

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just a couple of days ago the Apache Software Foundation announced its annual report and Apache
```

Flink being in the Top 5 in all relevant categories is just an outcome of the work of the
community (that has been done yet again) for 1.14.0. The consistency how this project is moving
forward is remarkable. Once again 200 plus contributors worked on over 1,000 issues.

Apache Flink not only supports batch and stream processing, but has been always following the goal
of making it a unified experience. With Apache Flink 1.14.0 batch and stream processing moved closer

> together. The first sinks and sources are now providing a unified API (following FLIP-27 and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
together. The first sinks and sources are now providing a unified API (following [FLIP-27](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-27%3A+Refactor+Source+Interface) and
```

> FLIP-143). Hybrid source has been introduced. The DataStream batch mode has been pushed to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[FLIP-143](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-143%3A+Unified+Sink+API)). Hybrid source has been introduced. The DataStream batch mode has been pushed to the
```

> TableAPI. Under the hood checkpoints are allowed even after tasks are finished truly enabling mixed
> or bounded jobs. Existing features have been haromised throughout all available APIs. From
> DataStream to TableAPI and SQL and vice versa. The DataStream batch mode is maturing after its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table API. Under the hood checkpoints are allowed even after tasks are finished truly enabling mixed
or bounded jobs. Existing features have been haromised throughout all available APIs. From
DataStream to Table API and SQL and vice versa. The DataStream batch mode is maturing after its
```
All the other occurrences of Table API are written with a space in this blog post.

initial release in 1.13.0.

> Fault tolerance is part of Flink’s nature, still it can never be enough. By using the new option of

Reviewer 2: This sounds a bit like Flink was already fault tolerant and not it is more fault tolerant :) That's not the case.

debloating the buffers the checkpoint size can decrease significantly and reduce checkpointing times
to a minimum.

> That’s not all there is a huge list of improvements and new additions through out all components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That’s not all there is a huge list of improvements and new additions throughout all components.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That’s not all. There is a huge list of improvements and new additions through out all components.
```

Also we had to say goodbye to some features that have been superseded in recent releases. We hope
you like the new release and we’d be eager to learn about your experience with it, which yet
unsolved problems it solves, what new use-cases it unlocks for you.

{% toc %}

# Notable improvements for a Unified Batch and Stream Processing experience

Apache Flink unlocks both batch and stream processing use cases. There is a lot of traction for
both. Initially both features were rather separated, that’s why the API were not really aligned in
the first place and also moved into apart over time. With both APIs being stable users started to
combine them in their solutions. Having batch style workloads to initially process historic data and
then switching into the streaming mode to deal with live data is something that makes sense. But
having the two APIs separated not only lead to the mentioned differences but also to big white spots
on the sparsity matrices and it became quite confusing what worked with which API and what not.
About a year ago the community started to unify the experience by seeing batch as a special case of

> streaming. The notion of bounded and unbounded streams has been introduced and initially released in

Reviewer 2: I think, the notion of bounded/unbounded streams and batch being a special case of streaming has always been there. 

It is just that we've been executing batch programs as if they were streaming programs - not making use of their bounded nature to improve performance. This is what batch execution mode addresses.

the most recent Apache Flink release 1.13. Now this effort has been continued as Apache Flink not

> only wants to unlock use cases bot also making it a good user experience. The list below

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
only wants to unlock use cases but also making it a good user experience. The list below
```

demonstrates the impact of this change. It is not only about the now deprecated DataSet API and the
DataStream API, it also affects sources and sinks, checkpointing, the Table API, Flink SQL,…

> ## Unified Source and Sink APIs

Reviewer 2: This paragraph sounds way to negative too me.

Sources and sinks play a big role to unlock both streaming and batch use cases. There’s quite a list
of sources and sinks currently supported included in Apache Flink. There are also some external
packages available. It might be hard to find two that support the same set of features. For sure
this applies to supporting bounded and unbounded streams, but there are also differences on what is
exposed in the Table API and SQL and what kind of checkpointing is supported. That’s why the

> community came up with FLINK-27 and FLIP-143. With Apache Flink 1.14. it is the first time they have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
community came up with FLIP-27 and FLIP-143. With Apache Flink 1.14. it is the first time they have
```
Not sure whether we want to link the FLIPs here a second time ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

> community came up with FLINK-27 and FLIP-143. With Apache Flink 1.14. it is the first time they have
> been truly implemented the FLIPs for Kafka source and sink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
community came up with FLINK-27 and FLIP-143. With Apache Flink 1.14. it is the first time that these FLIPs have
been truly implemented for Kafka source and sink.
```

The changes in the sink circle mostly around committing behaviour to enable all delivery guarantees
to provide solid fault tolerance.

The Kafka source has already been in good shape. This is now also exposed in the Table API and SQL.

## Hybrid Sources

> User are facing the problem of having more and more sources for data which requires them to unify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users are facing the problem of having more and more sources for data which requires them to unify
```

the data in the first place. Till now the only way to achieve some of the use cases was to have two
parallel Flink jobs or to implement that in a hacky way. This is not the user experience Apache

> Flink wants to provide. With Apache Flink 1.14 hybrid sources was introduced to provide a coherent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink wants to provide. With Apache Flink 1.14 hybrid sources were introduced to provide a coherent
```

experience in unifying heterogenous data feeds into one homogenous data stream. So you might have a
file source to load historic data and then switch over to a Kafka source to cover the streaming
data.

## Aligning DataStream API, Table API and Flink SQL

> With the DataSet API being deprecated the future of Flink will circle around the DataStream API.

Reviewer 3: Where did we actually publish that the DataSet API is deprecated? I know it is mentioned in the docs, but was it ever in any release announcement? I couldn't find it in the 1.12/1.13 notes.
Or is L51 the "announcement"?

Reviewer 4: On the ML we actually decided to have a dedicated blog post again, but this didn't happen yet.

intelligence background than software engineering is growing. The entry point into Apache Flink is
often Flink SQL and the Table API. At first it might be simple use cases but soon the requirements
are growing and more and more features that are only exposed in the lower level APIs are needed. For
Flink it is a goal to expose all functionalities on all levels as much as possible. As mentioned,
this especially applies to the unified stream and batch processing experience. With 1.14 there are
several improvements in that direction. Now the batch mode is exposed in the Table API pushing the
feature from the lower level API to the higher level one. But there are also improvements in the
other direction like allowing Table API Pipelines being used in the DataStream API. The new Kafka
source has been, as mentioned, exposed in the Table API and Flink SQL. In the Python API there have
also been some improvements by e.g. supporting UDF chaining in the Python DataStream API and general
improvements regarding the DataStream and Table API.

## Unified Checkpointing Experience

One of the biggest effort, that is not really user facing, but will have a huge impact is unifying

> the checkpointing experience between bounded and unbounded data streams. This his been a huge amount
> of work too. Essentially this means allowing checkpoints after some tasks are finished. This is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the checkpointing experience between bounded and unbounded data streams. Essentially this means allowing checkpoints after some tasks are finished. This is
```
Feels weird to mention this.

often the case in heterogeneous environments mixing bounded and unbounded streams (and sources) and
has a huge impact in the exactly once delivery guarantee.

> # Notable improvements regarding production readiness

Reviewer 2: This could be understand in a way that Flink is not production ready yet ;) I think, what you actually mean are improvements for robustness and ease of operations.

The previous section was all about improving the user experience, but Apache Flink became what it is
by enabling use cases in stream processing that have not been possible before. Some of the biggest
data processing use cases in the industry are built on top of Apache Flink.

## Buffer debloating

Running huge use cases processing a lot of data in Apache Flink means long checkpointing times and
therefor a rather poor experience when it comes to fault tolerance. With unaligned checkpoints a
feature to target this experience was recently added to Apache Flink. One of the reasons for the

> slow checkpoints are the huge size of them, this is mostly caused by data that is in the buffers. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slow checkpoints are the huge size of them which is mostly caused by buffered data. In
```

trying to minimise the data that are used before and after a task. They have been of fixed size
until this release. Now they changed towards self-optimising themselves reducing the buffer size
significantly and therefor reducing the checkpointing time a lot.

## Fine grained resource and network buffer management

Apache Flink is a data processor. Even by acknowledging stream and batch based use cases within
those two types there are uncountable options on how a data processing use case might look. To get
the optimum out of Flink there are now more options on how to manage resources moving from coarse
grained resource management to a fine grained one.

There is also an improvement on how to do network buffer management overcoming some existing
limitations. All in all this should require less network memory.

## Connector metrics

Moving use cases into production usually also means increasing observability. Connectors are the
entry and the exit for a Flink job and it usually makes sense to monitor what is happening there
closely. The telemetry data of a connector can also provide important pointers to narrow down

> problems or bottlenecks. In 1.14. there are default metrics for connectors introduced and also

Reviewer 3: I think we can score bonus points here my giving examples, like numRecordsIn for sources / numRecordsOut for sink, which _so_ many people asked for over the years.

> implemented for some of the connectors.

Reviewer 3: We should explicitly mention to which connectors this applies.

# Other improvements

## Building a connector ecosystem

Metrics and API unification have not been the only thing that has been done when it comes to
connectors. The Apache community will stress improving the connector system. In this release we

> added the Pulsar connectors as well as a testing framework.

Reviewer: A testing framework for the Pulsar connector? Or for connectors in general?

Reviewer 5: I think the test framework is for all the connectors. This sentence would be confused for readers.

## Bigger, faster, stronger SQL

Since the SQL interface was added it got a lot of traction. It is obvious that this will be an
important touch point for users in the short, mid and long term. Implementing a SQL based interface
not only opens up a lot of opportunities but also generates a lot of inquiries for features of that
comprehensive language. Features that are not as easy to follow up especially as this language was
defined for databases and not data processors. Besides unifying the APIs and exposing connectors
there the contributors also improved the SQL Client, added table valued functions and much more.

## Python

> The python API also got more observability features and optimisations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Python API also got more observability features and optimisations.
```

# Goodbye to the legacy planner

Maintaining an open source project also means saying good-bye to some beloved features eventually.
This is important to keep a project healthy and reduce outgrows that cause maintainability issues.
For sure this also means that some users might need to change their implementation and in some cases
things that have been possible might not be possible anymore. Apache Flink always follows the proper

> lifecycle. Having a look the roadmap provides a lot of transparency to set the expectation of users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lifecycle. Having a look at the roadmap provides a lot of transparency to set the expectation of users
```
